readme.md, before:

# Compiler Project

This project is for learning purposes only.

We implement a compiler for a simple language. The compiler will be divided
into the following parts:

* a *lexer*: process the input and generates a list of tokens; 

* an [LR(1)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/LR_parser) *parser*: generates an 
[Abstract Syntax Tree](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abstract_syntax_tree)
-- or AST;

* a *scope checker*: builds a symbol table for each scope of the program
and checks whether all variables and functions used have been declared, and
if there are redeclarations;

* a *type checker*: checks whether assignments and expressions have the
expected type;

* a *code generator*: generates x64 assembly code targeted at
Linux. The resulting assembly will be processed by `nasm` into object 
code, and then linked with `ld`.

* and a *standard library*: functions that can be included by **ulp** programs,
and are automatically linked in the linkage phase.

## The Language

An incomplete specification of the language is in the `docs`
directory. For the lexer we have [`docs/lexicon.txt`](docs/lexicon.txt), and
for the parser we have [`docs/grammar.txt`](docs/grammar.txt). For now,
the language will just be called **ulp**, for "uma linguagem de programação".

Many examples of simple **ulp** programs can be found at the 
[`test/cases`](test/cases) directory.

## Building and Using the compiler

To build the compiler, use `make`:

    $ make

This will create the compiler at `build/ulpc`. To execute, from the `build`
directory:

    $ ./ulpc --help
    ulpc -- The ulp compiler.
    Version: 0.0.7

This will display `ulpc`'s help. To compile a file (so far some an incomplete
assembly code will be printed to `stdout`):

    $ ./ulpc /path/to/my/source/file.ul

### Testing the Compiler

To test the compiler, a series of **ulp** programs in the `test/cases` 
directory can be automatically executed via the test script:

    $ aux/test
    Running test suite...

    Positive tests:
	    pass 0001_noop.ul
	    pass 0002_noops.ul

    <output truncated ... >

    	pass 0221_undeclared_func.ul
	    pass 0225_declared_wrong.ul
	    pass 0226_declared_wrong.ul

    92 tests, 56 passes and 36 failures.

The passes and fails are displayed in green and red, respectively.

### Inspecting Parse Trees

If you have `graphviz` installed in your machine, you can check the 
parse trees by using the auxiliar script in `aux/view`:

    $ aux/view docs/current.ulp

This is an example of AST:

![AST](docs/ast.png)

## Roadmap

Currently, the compiler is capable of parsing the program
[`docs/current.ulp`](docs/current.ulp). Our plans for the next versions are:

Version **0.0.x**: each merge to master should increase `x`.

Version **0.1.0**: some executable being generated. Doesn't have to be the
full language, just a small subset of it (for example: just int arithmetic).

Commit message:

Fixes docs. Adds empty build dir to git.

readme.md, after:

# Compiler Project

This project is for learning purposes only.

We implement a compiler for a simple language. The compiler will be divided
into the following parts:

* a *lexer*: process the input and generates a list of tokens; 

* an [LR(1)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/LR_parser) *parser*: generates an 
[Abstract Syntax Tree](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abstract_syntax_tree)
-- or AST;

* a *scope checker*: builds a symbol table for each scope of the program
and checks whether all variables and functions used have been declared, and
if there are redeclarations;

* a *type checker*: checks whether assignments and expressions have the
expected type;

* a *code generator*: generates x64 assembly code targeted at
Linux. The resulting assembly will be processed by `nasm` into object 
code, and then linked with `ld`.

* and a *standard library*: functions that can be included by **ulp** programs,
and are automatically linked in the linkage phase.

## The Language

An incomplete specification of the language is in the `docs`
directory. For the lexer we have [`docs/lexicon.txt`](docs/lexicon.txt), and
for the parser we have [`docs/grammar.txt`](docs/grammar.txt). For now,
the language will just be called **ulp**, for "uma linguagem de programação".

Many examples of simple **ulp** programs can be found at the 
[`test/cases`](test/cases) directory.

## Building and Using the Compiler

To build the compiler, use `make`:

    $ make

This will create the compiler at `build/ulpc`. To execute, from the `build`
directory:

    $ ./ulpc --help
    ulpc -- The ulp compiler.
    Version: 0.0.7

This will display `ulpc`'s help. To compile a file (so far an incomplete
assembly code will be printed to `stdout`):

    $ ./ulpc /path/to/my/source/file.ul

### Testing the Compiler

To test the compiler, a series of **ulp** programs in the `test/cases` 
directory can be automatically executed via the test script:

    $ aux/test
    Running test suite...

    Positive tests:
	    pass 0001_noop.ul
	    pass 0002_noops.ul

    <output truncated ... >

        pass 0221_undeclared_func.ul
	    pass 0225_declared_wrong.ul
	    pass 0226_declared_wrong.ul

    92 tests, 56 passes and 36 failures.

The passes and fails are displayed in green and red, respectively.

### Inspecting Parse Trees

If you have `graphviz` installed in your machine, you can check the 
parse trees by using the auxiliar script in `aux/view`:

    $ aux/view docs/current.ulp

This is an example of an AST that you might see:

![AST](docs/ast.png)

## Roadmap

Currently, the compiler is capable of parsing most programs not using the
"match" construct, doing scope resolution for variables and functions and
generating assembly for some of the AST nodes.

Our plans for the next versions are:

Version **0.0.x**: each merge to master should increase `x`.

Version **0.1.0**: some executable being generated. Doesn't have to be the
full language, just a small subset of it (for example: just int arithmetic).
